Blair Pasarkar\
The Covid-19 Pandemic was one of the worst global catastrophes in recent history. Entire countries shut down, economies crumbled, and millions passed away. New York City, the largest city in the United States, was detrimentally hit by Covid. The bustling city turned into a quiet ghost town. Now, five years later, there is a lot to learn about how NYC’s transit system, the MTA, has recovered post pandemic.\
To begin to understand the data, we must first establish basic principles of the data set. This data was created and has been maintained by the New York Government. Every observation in the data set is a date from March 2020 to January 2025, which totals 1776 observations, and there are 15 variables in the data set. The main variable of interest is the bus ridership percentage comparable to Pre-Pandemic Day. There are no missing values in the data set. This data set will be used to answer the question of how the MTA recovered post-pandemic.\
My first graph is a scatter plot. The x variable is the date, being June or Dec of 2020 to 2024, and the y variable is the bus ridership percentage comparable pre-pandemic day. The graph has points on it reflecting the percentage of bus ridership and each point, reflecting a day, has a line connecting it to the next in order to show how the ridership changes over time. Overall, throughout Dec 2020 to Dec 2024 the bus ridership percentage compared to Pre-Covid steadily landed between 50-75%. Between this time frame, there were days that were outstanding outliers with over 100%, showing a rise in transit post-pandemic; with that, there were also less significant outliers on the lower end being between 20-50%. This plot demonstrates that the bus system in NYC was never able to fully recover from the pandemic. They have only been able to consistently maintain half of the previous riders. Even directly comparing Dec 2020 to Dec 2024, there is no significant difference between either of them. The graph demonstrates a system that is being phased out post-pandemic as so many of their users have left the bus system. This can be attributed to other factors such as a rise in subway usage or conditions, or even a decline in the conditions of buses, and number of drivers. However subway usage and number of drivers were not included within the graph and conditions were not accounted for in the data set. The lack of report on conditions could be considered a potential bias as the NY Government would be less willing to disclose that public transit has worsened in quality. Overall, the graph proves a decline in bus usage post pandemic as the ridership numbers maintain at 50% of pre-covid’s riders.\
A potential factor for the decline of the buses in the MTA could be the traffic levels in NYC. In order to approach this issue, I created a stacked bar plot comparing traffic right after Covid’s beginning in the year 2020. One bar represented the total traffic amount on bridges and tunnels and the other represented percent of traffic on bridges and tunnels compared to pre-pandemic days. The x-axis displays a month from March to Dec of 2020 and the y-axis displays the amount of traffic on bridges and tunnels by millions and the % of traffic on bridges and tunnels compared to pre-pandemic. Immediately as Covid hit, public transit usage collectively declined(as proven by April and May 2020 in the graph), but as 2020 progressed and lock downs lifted it is important to see how traffic levels changed. April was the lowest point in traffic at less than 12.5 million people and less than 37% of the traffic compared to pre-pandemic. However, starting in May these numbers swiftly rose back up again and continued to rise throughout the summer months. Traffic on tunnels and bridges peaked in October at almost 25 million people and nearly 87.5% of the traffic compared to pre-pandemic. The number steadily dropped by a couple percent and millions in the later months, but still maintained at the same general level. The traffic was unable to reach the amount that it had before the pandemic. Though, an important part to note is that this is not just the traffic generally it is with the bridges and tunnels which are for commuters and cross-borough transportation. Therefore, we are not getting a complete image on the traffic levels in the city as the data can not fully show that information. Most importantly to take away, is the swift comeback of traffic to the city right after March 2020; however this data set does not tell about traffic within the city itself, only inter-bourough or inter-state traffic is recorded.\
The third graph I created was a scatter plot. The x-axis represents the dates spanning from March 2020 to Jan 2025. The y-axis represents bus total estimated ridership. The data shows that between this time frame the ridership changed by hundreds of thousands nearly everyday. Through the trend line, you can see how there is not a consistent trend of users and the numbers vary greatly. This suggests that the bus system is not very relied on by the NYC population since they do not maintain a constant ridership. This graph reveals a lot of information about bus dependence, however the shortcomings of it is that it does not show another transportation line that could be relied on more heavily instead. The data set also does not give information as to bus stop reliability in terms of arriving and departing on time, which would affect if people trust them. This could be a potential bias that the NY Government would not want to reveal. Overall, buses are not consistently depended on as shown through the plot.\
The last graph I completed was a histogram demonstrating the main variable of interest, bus ridership percentage compared to pre-pandemic day. The x-axis represents the percent of bus ridership compared to pre-pandemic and the y-axis represents the frequency of these percentages by days occurring from March 2020 to January 2025. The histogram shows the highest occurring percentage was 65% of pre-pandemic ridership at nearly 400 days out of the time frame. The second, third, and fourth highest were in the range of 55-70% of pre-pandemic ridership. This data maintains the idea that bus ridership has not been able to recover since the pandemic. However, the data is limited as it does not say particularly what the time of occurrence is for any of these percentages, though it is able to much more clearly demonstrate the frequency of percentages compared to the scatterplot.\
Through these graphs and data sets, we are able to see how NYC MTA has recovered after the global pandemic. New York was able to recover very quickly in terms of general opening city access again as shown in the quick rise in traffic of tunnels and bridges right after the spring months in 2020. However, the main variable of interest being the percent of bus ridership compared to pre-pandemic days has not been able to make the same recovery as it consistently sits under 75% of pre-Covid ridership. Analyzing this data combined with inconsistent ridership of buses demonstrates how buses have been phased out comparative to its prior usage. Buses have not been able to reach its peak ridership ever again, despite the city’s rebuild post-Covid. NYC was able to make a full recovery from the pandemic, however buses are beginning to meet their end.
